[graphql/docs] Add initial graphql docs content (#15366)
MystenLabs/sui: docs/content/references/sui-api/graphql/guides.mdx

---

> title: Guides

Reviewer: This title could be better. Maybe from your desc: Sui GraphQL Guidelines?

Author: I think the title is ok. If we do `Sui GraphQL Guidelines` it will appear like that on the left, and it's becoming too much. Folks are in the Sui docs, so we shouldn't extra annotate things with Sui, in my opinion.

> description: Guidelines for working with the Sui GraphQL RPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Guidelines for working with the Sui GraphQL RPC, how to build effective queries, and how to migrate from the JSON RPC format.
```
A little context...the `description` is what's shown on search results. The content weighs pretty heavily on SEO results, so want to include Sui GraphQL, JSON RPC, and any other terms you think might help people get to this page when they search for it.

```shell
# basic query
curl -X POST https://graphql-beta.mainnet.sui.io \
     --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
     --data '{
          "query": "query { epoch { referenceGasPrice } }"
     }'
# query with variables
curl -X POST https://graphql-beta.mainnet.sui.io \
     --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
     --data '{
  "query": "query ($epochID: Int!) { epoch(id: $epochID) { referenceGasPrice } }",
  "variables": {
    "epochID": 123
  }
}'
```

### Working with variables

Variables are a powerful way for passing different ObjectIDs, Digests, Sui Addresses, and other kind of data for full flexibility. Below is an example for querying the reference gas price for epoch 100, by passing the epoch as a variable:

```graphql
query ($epochID: Int!) {
  epoch(id: $epochID) {
    referenceGasPrice
  }
}
variables {
   "epochID": 100
}

And the result is:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "epoch": {
      "referenceGasPrice": "780"
    }
  }
}
```

:::info
When working with the online GraphQL IDE, paste the variables' values in the `Variables` pane on the bottom left of the window, without the `variables` keyword.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::
```
Nit. I read somewhere that not having the empty line before closing and after opening`:::`s can cause issues in some corner cases.

### Multiple data in one query

> A less ideal situation that rose when using JSON RPC was when data needed was spread across multiple queries. The user needs to execute these queries one by one. With GraphQL, the user can specify which fields are needed, and get that information. For example, the following query retrieves the first 20 transaction blocks (and the sender's address, the gas object used to pay, the gas price, and buget) after a specific one, at epoch 97. In JSON RPC this would have required multiple steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JSON RPC format causes issues when data you need is spread across multiple queries. You must execute these queries one by one. With GraphQL, you can specify the fields you need and get that information. For example, the following query retrieves the first 20 transaction blocks (and the sender's address, the gas object used to pay, the gas price, and budget) after a specific one, at epoch `97`. In JSON RPC, this requires multiple steps.
```

```graphql
# Fetch the first 20 transactions after 231220100 for epoch 97
{
  epoch(id:97) {
    transactionBlockConnection(first: 20, after:"231220100") {
      pageInfo {
        hasNextPage
        endCursor
      }
      edges {
        cursor
        node {
          digest
          sender {
            address
          }
          effects {
            gasEffects {
              gasObject {
                address
              }
            }
          }
          gasInput {
            gasPrice
            gasBudget
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
  
```

## Migrating guides

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections highlight the steps necessary for you to take to migrate your codebase to leverage GraphQL queries on Sui.
```

### From JSON RPC API

> The JSON RPC API provided several individual endpoints to get specific data (e.g., `get_totalTransactionBlocks`). While this can be achieved similarly with GraphQL, it is more powerful to determine the data needed in one query that involves multiple aspects (e.g., transactions, balance, coins), execute that query, and get the results. This guide showcases how to use GraphQL instead of JSON RPC on a few original endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JSON RPC API provided several individual endpoints to get specific data (for example, `get_totalTransactionBlocks`). While this can be achieved similarly with GraphQL, it is more powerful to determine the data you need in one query that involves multiple aspects (for example, transactions, balance, coins), execute that query, and get the results. This guide showcases how to use GraphQL instead of JSON RPC on a few original endpoints.
```

#### Example 1: Get total transaction blocks
The goal is to get the total number of transaction blocks in the network.

<Tabs groupId="migrating-json-rpc">

<TabItem value="json-rpc" label="JSON-RPC">

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "sui_getTotalTransactionBlocks",
  "params": []
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="graphql" label="GraphQL">

```graphql
{
  checkpoint {
    networkTotalTransactions
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Example 2: Get a specific transaction block

> The goal is to get the transaction block by its digest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal is to get the transaction block by its digest.
```

<Tabs groupId="migrating-json-rpc">

<TabItem value="json-rpc" label="JSON-RPC">

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "sui_getTransactionBlock",
  "params": [
    "Hay2tj3GcDYcE3AMHrej5WDsHGPVAYsegcubixLUvXUF",
    {
      "showInput": true,
      "showRawInput": false,
      "showEffects": true,
      "showEvents": true,
      "showObjectChanges": false,
      "showBalanceChanges": false
    }
  ]
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="graphql" label="GraphQL">

```graphql
{
  transactionBlock(digest: "Hay2tj3GcDYcE3AMHrej5WDsHGPVAYsegcubixLUvXUF") {
    gasInput {
      gasSponsor {
        address
      }
      gasPrice
      gasBudget
    }
    effects {
      status
      timestamp
      checkpoint {
        sequenceNumber
      }
      epoch {
        epochId
        referenceGasPrice
      }
    }
  }
}
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Example 3: Get coin objects owned by an address

> The goal is to return all `Coin<coin_type>` objects owned by an address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal is to return all `Coin<coin_type>` objects an address owns.
```

<Tabs groupId="migrating-json-rpc">

<TabItem value="json-rpc" label="JSON-RPC">

```json
{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "suix_getCoins",
  "params": [
    "0x5094652429957619e6efa79a404a6714d1126e63f551f4b6c7fb76440f8118c9", //owner
    "0x2::sui::SUI",                                                      //coin type
    "0xe5c651321915b06c81838c2e370109b554a448a78d3a56220f798398dde66eab", //cursor
    3 //limit
  ]
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="graphql" label="GraphQL">

```graphql
{
  address(address: "0x5094652429957619e6efa79a404a6714d1126e63f551f4b6c7fb76440f8118c9") {
    coinConnection(
      first: 3, 
      after: "0x5094652429957619e6efa79a404a6714d1126e63f551f4b6c7fb76440f8118c9", 
      type: "0x2::sui::SUI"
    ) {
      nodes {
        asMoveObject {
          asCoin {
            address
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

:::info

> Observe that the cursor is now passed in the `after` (or `before`) fields on the connection, and the limit in the `first` or `last` fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The cursor is now passed in the `after` (or `before`) fields on the connection, and the limit in the `first` or `last` fields.

```
See previous comment about the empty lines suggestion.

:::

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Support in TS SDK

> TBD

Reviewer: As commented, the page will be reachable by search. If you're not okay with this section displaying as is, remove and replace when content is available.
